Now to do some analyses.
In this exercise, you will just focus on the activations from the fifth transformer block.
So find the activations that correspond to the short, the long and the medium length tokens.
Then you can make histograms of the activations for these three different lengths.
Pooling data across all of the neurons in this transformer block.
And you can see that in this plot here the histograms are not exactly overlapping, but quite similar
to each other.
I will make some interpretations about this when I discuss my code.
But first you should pause the video and code up this exercise.
Remember that the fifth transformer block has an index of four.
So this is actually corresponding to the fifth transformer block.
Okay.
so here I get all of the activations.
Now, the thing about the batches is that the reason why we batch up the data is partly for convenience,
for processing efficiency, and also partly because models don't.
Or at least this model doesn't process up to 8000 tokens at once.
So otherwise there's really no particular reason to batch the data.
So therefore I mean no like theoretically meaningful reason to batch the data.
It's really just done for practical convenience.
So therefore in these analyses we will often batch the data just to do a forward pass and then flatten
the data or vectorize the data when we want to do the analyses.
So let me actually show you what the shape of this will be.
So here's just a reminder that the shape of this oops I meant to say dot shape is 16 by 15.
So this is our batch by neurons.
And now when I reshape this to minus one by neurons.
Then I get 8192.
So this is all the tokens by the 3000 neurons.
Okay.
So that's just a little bit of a explanation of this line of code here.
Very nice.
Okay.
So now we actually do have floating point numbers because as let me uh sorry, let me do this again
just to show you what these numbers look like.
So these really are floating point numbers.
These are the activation values coming from these neurons.
So that is the embeddings vectors from all of the 8000 tokens.
And those get pushed through, uh, everything that happens before the fifth transformer block in the
MLP expansion layer.
And then, you know, all the weights, all the multiplications.
And then we get all of the Activation values, and that is what these numbers correspond to.
So we don't use bar plots.
We don't use numpy unique.
To get these data we use histograms.
In this case these are all PyTorch data formats.
So I'm using torch histogram.
You can also use numpy.
Of course you can use numpy histogram.
If you're doing that it's no problem.
But you would then want to convert everything to numpy like this.
You can convert to numpy in here if you prefer.
You can also um whereas the hook functions if you like you could also do this.
You could convert all of the activations into numpy directly inside this hook function.
Totally fine.
Lots of correct ways to do this, uh, these kinds of analyses and work with these data.
Okay.
But anyway, the way that I coded this was in torch.
So torch dot histogram.
All of the activations for the tokens that are less than the median length, greater than the median
length, and equal to the median length.
Okay.
And what do these results mean.
So essentially these results are telling us that in this MLP layer in the fifth transformer block,
there isn't really a very clear distinction between the processing.
So the activation magnitudes and the length of the token.
Now maybe there is some shift.
Maybe there's a little bit of a bias that the longer tokens have a slight shift towards more negative
activations overall.
Uh, if you want to, you could do some statistical analyses.
I'm not including that here, but even if it is significant, there's certainly not a really compelling
big response.
And my question for you is, are you surprised by this result?
Were you expecting that the MLP neurons would show a qualitative difference?
Or maybe just a shift difference between activations for short tokens versus the long tokens?
One thing to keep in mind is that the token lengths have nothing to do with the token indices.
So the token indices that go into the model, these just correspond to different rows of the token embeddings
matrix.
And regardless of the length of a token, each token still only gets one embeddings vector.
So one row in the token embeddings matrix, regardless of how short or long that token is.
On the other hand, the length of the token is not entirely arbitrary that actually does correspond
to the frequency of that character sequence appearing in the texts in the training set, so it is the
case that the shorter tokens tend to appear more often in the text, and the longer tokens tend to appear
less often in the text that the models have been trained on.
And what do you think generally about this approach of binning the data into 2 to 3 groups, depending
on the median split?
The thing is that we actually do have a lot of information in these token distributions.
There's 16 different values of token lengths.
And I'm basically ignoring all of that meaningful variability simply by cutting the data into two bins.
If you want to ignore the exact median or three bins if you want to include the exact median.
So that means that we've lost a lot of richness of the data because of the discretization.
Yeah.
So doing a median split analysis can be interesting.
It's done relatively frequently in statistics and machine learning, but it loses a lot of information
and precision.
And so it should be used sparingly and mostly just for visualization.
It is better in general to take advantage of all the meaningful information that is packed into the
variability of the data.
And that's what we are going to do here in exercise five and also exercise six.
But before telling you about the exercise instructions, let me first show a reminder of the formulas
for covariance and correlation coefficient.
So the correlation coefficient.
The Pearson correlation r I showed a few times earlier in the course.
In particular when I was comparing the correlation to cosine similarity.
Covariance is the numerator of the correlation coefficient.
The interpretation of the covariance is almost the same as the interpretation of the correlation, except
that the covariance retains the scale of the data because the units are not divided out.
On the other hand, when the variances of the data are standardized to a value of one, then the denominator
in the correlation equation is trivially equal to one.
So if the variance of x equals the variance of y equals one, then we have one times one, and the square
root of that is one.
And better still, when the mean of each variable is zero, then the covariance formula simplifies further
to be just the sum of element wise multiplications, which is literally just the dot product.
And so what you are going to do in the code for this exercise is.
Calculate the correlation coefficient by first standardizing the activations and standardizing the token
length variables, and then taking their dot product and dividing by the number of samples minus one.
By the way, it kind of seems like this scaling factor of minus one is missing from the correlation
formula, but it actually is in there.
But the scaling is in the numerator once and it's in the denominator twice for the two variance terms.
So that becomes that scaling factor squared.
And then the square root of that.
So it just cleanly cancels out.
And that's why the divisive normalization of n minus one is typically just omitted from the formula
for the correlation anyway.
So with that out of the way let's get to exercise five.
The goal of exercise five is to calculate and visualize the correlations between MLP neuron activation
and token length.
Again, for now we are just focusing on the fifth transformer block.
So begin by standardizing all of the activations and then confirm that the standardization code is correct,
which you can do by looking at the mean and at the standard deviation of just one of the randomly selected
neurons.
So here I just picked neuron 600 index 600.
And I saw that its mean is very close to zero and its standard deviation is basically one.
So remember that for standardizing we're standardizing across the activations within each neuron.
So each neuron itself needs to have a mean of zero or at least within some reasonable numerical tolerance
and a standard deviation of one, and this is done over all of the 8000 tokens.
You can do this in a for loop.
Or you can do this with one line of code using broadcasting.
Whatever you are comfortable with, that's fine.
But in the end you want to end up with a matrix or a tensor.
I called it z for z standardized activations and it should be this size.
So all of the tokens and all of the MLP neurons.
Now you also need to standardize the token length.
And you should also confirm that that has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
Next you can calculate the correlation coefficient.
And you can do this twice, once using Numpy's core Coef function using the Non-standardized activations
and the Non-standardized token lengths.
And that's going to give you some value.
And then you can confirm that the code you implement to calculate the covariance, not the correlation,
but the covariance, but of the standardized variables.
That code is going to be in here.
And that number should be, you know, within some reasonable tolerance more or less identical to Numpy's
core Coef function.
So here I'm just picking one neuron just for confirmation of the accuracy of the code here.
And once you have that code correct, you can then calculate the relationship between activation and
token length for all of the neurons in this transformer block.
And then you can visualize that in a histogram.
It will look something like this.
Here you see the counts and the correlation coefficient.
Again this is the linear relationship between activation magnitude in each neuron in one layer and all
of the token lengths.
Okay.
I will have a few things to say about that, but first you should pause the video and code up the analysis,
and then you can come back and watch me discuss the code.
Here again, I am extracting the activations and flattening them into a vector.
In this case, I want to start working with numpy functions and the numpy library.
So I am converting all of these data which are in a PyTorch tensor into numpy.
I'm not sure if numpy ify is a real word, but you know what I mean.
Okay.
And here is where I'm standardizing all of the activations.
So the standardization formula is the data minus the mean divided by the standard deviation.
As I mentioned in the slides you can do this in a for loop over all Hundred 8000 neurons.
Totally fine.
You can also do this in one line of code, using broadcasting by first averaging over all of the tokens
and keeping the dimensions such that this mean vector remains a multidimensional array, and the same
thing for the standard deviation.
This parameter here is for the denominator degrees of freedom.
You set it to one so that you calculate a sample standard deviation.
The only difference between setting the denominator degrees of freedom to be zero, to be one versus
the default value, which is zero.
That's what happens if you don't specify that parameter at all, is just about dividing the data by
n or n minus one.
If you have it set to zero, it's no problem really.
Formally, technically, you know, if you want to get really technical about it.
That is incorrect because we only have samples that we're working with here, not population data sets.
So it should really be, uh, the denominator degrees of freedom of one really doesn't matter.
Either way.
It's not a big deal.
Okay, uh, here, I'm just confirming the average for any given, uh, neuron should be zero, or at
least very close to zero.
And the standard deviation should be.
In theory, it should be exactly one.
But because we have, uh, finite samples and because of just computer rounding, precision errors and
so on, it's going to be very close to one, but maybe not exactly.
Okay.
And then here I'm applying basically the same code here I'm standardizing the token lengths.
And we can see that it has a mean very close to zero and a standard deviation of one.
Very nice okay.
So here is the formula for the covariance.
So element wise multiplication and then sum.
Now in the formula that I showed, it actually looked like this.
So it was the data minus the mean of the data like this.
Uh, and then I would have to also mean center these data.
But here I literally subtract the mean already up here I'm subtracting the mean, which means that this
piece of code here is equivalent to saying -0, which means that we don't need it at all.
Okay.
Just a little reminder.
And then we divide by n minus one.
Now here you have to make sure that you're not dividing by the number of neurons.
The covariance is done separately for each individual neuron over all of the activations.
So if you would have code that looks like this, it still works in the sense that you get an answer,
but it's not going to be the correct answer.
This is the wrong normalization.
What you normalize is over the number of tokens or the number of samples that you've measured.
And that matches the correlation over here.
Okay.
So this is a little statistics reminder that the Pearson correlation coefficient equals the covariance
of the two variables.
If those variables are standardized.
So once we have that once we have confirmed that then we can loop over all of the neurons and calculate
the correlation between activations and token lengths over all the tokens separately for each neuron.
Using a very simple piece of code that looks like this.
By the way, if you are familiar with and comfortable with both statistics and linear algebra, it turns
out that you do not actually need to do this in a for loop.
You can actually implement this using matrix multiplication.
I'm not going to show that here, but it's technically possible.
And if you do it and you would like to share, or if you have a question about it, feel free to leave
a post in the Q&A.
Anyway, so here I'm creating the histogram.
So what do we see here?
We see that lots of neurons have a broad range of correlation coefficients.
Some of them are fairly large.
So pretty robust positive correlations.
Some of them are pretty robust negative.
But most of the neurons have a correlation that is weak but negative.
And it looks like the population would be significantly below zero.
So if we consider that a null effect.
So no relationship whatsoever between the activations and the token lengths, that would correspond
to a correlation of zero.
And it does look like the bulk of the correlations are below zero.
And what does that mean?
Basically, that means that in general, the longer the token, the less activation we have in these
MLP neurons.
You could also flip that interpretation around.
So you could say that the shorter the token, the larger the activation in MLP neurons.
So it's certainly not the case for every single neuron, but at the level of the whole population of
this set of neurons in this particular layer, it does generally seem like there's stronger activation
when the tokens, when the token embeddings vectors come from pieces of text that are shorter, that
have fewer characters.
Exercise six has an analysis part and a visualization part.
The analysis part is pretty straightforward.
You just have to take the correlation code from exercise five and repeat it over all of the transformer
blocks.
By the way, as you are implementing this analysis, make sure to soft code the number of transformer
blocks, because in this model it's 12.
But when we switch to the larger version of this model, it's not going to be 12.
Anyway, when you extract histograms for the correlation distribution within each layer, make sure
to use the same histogram bin boundaries across all of the layers so you can compare them directly in
a plot and also in an image.
So then you can generate results and visualize them in a plot that looks something like this.
Obviously your plots will not have these big red boxes covering up all the fascinating findings.
So on this left plot, we have line plots corresponding to the histogram for each of the 12 transformer
block MLP layers.
Each color is a different line, and the color bar indicates the mapping between the color of the line
and the layer where that line or that histogram comes from.
By the way, there's some weird matplotlib color coding to get this color scale to work.
So if you have the plot but you're struggling with this little component of the visualization, then
feel free to just copy the code from the solutions file.
Okay, so here you're going to have 12 lines showing histograms of correlation coefficients between
activations of the neurons and the lengths of the tokens, and a separate line with a separate color
for each layer.
So then this image over here shows exactly the same data, but visualized in a slightly different format.
So now over here, the y axis corresponds to layer and the color corresponds to the density.
In other words, the color of this image here corresponds to the height of the y axis in this plot.
So same data in both axes, but they show the data in different ways.
And you will find that sometimes one visualization or the other is more clear or more revealing.
I hope you enjoy creating these graphs.
I always enjoy working with matplotlib, even when it gets a little bit frustrating.
Anyway, now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here I am looping over all of the layers.
Now notice that I'm not just hard coding the number 12 in here.
If I were to hard code the number 12 that actually would work for this model.
It would be fine, but it's better to soft code whenever possible.
So therefore I'm using model.
Layers.
And what do we do inside this for loop.
I get the activations as you've seen before and I standardize them as you've seen before.
And then I correlate them for each individual neuron as you've seen before.
So in fact, all of this code is exactly copied from exercise five.
All I did was just put in a layer number here and then all of these data.
So all of the individual correlations get stored in this matrix.
All cores which is layers by neurons.
Every layer, of course, has exactly the same number of neurons.
So this works in a one big matrix like this.
Okay.
And then here I'm getting the histograms.
Here I define the edges for the bins of the correlation coefficients -0.8 to plus 0.8 correlation.
And then 81 steps in between them.
And then yeah it creates a hist counts this matrix where I'm going to store again all of the data for
all of the layers and for all of the bins.
Now remember that the bin edges here, this variable here, when you say numpy dot hist and you input
the bins here, this variable defines all of the bin boundaries, which means there are n minus one
actual bins.
And that is why I have the minus one in here.
Okay, so run that uh yeah it takes a second.
I think I've already even run it.
Okay.
And then here I'm plotting.
Here is the first plot.
I can actually show the legend here.
Uh, the first plot on the left will show all of the lines and plotting all the lines in a for loop,
because I want to specify the color of each line to be the layer index divided by the total number of
layers.
Okay.
And then here is the, uh, image.
Here's where I'm creating the image over here.
And here's this funny looking code that you, uh, you use to create this color, uh, bar over here.
Okay, so that's about the code.
What do the results actually show?
So again here we see the x axis is the correlation coefficients.
What we looked at in the previous exercise was just one line over here showing the uh bulk of the correlations
a little bit shifted to the left.
And now you see it for all of the transformer blocks.
So I'll discuss this one in a moment.
It's kind of an oddball sticking out, but just, you know, when we look at all of the layers altogether,
we see that in general there's a pretty consistent shift, uh, a little bit left of zero.
And again, the interpretation here is that the shorter tokens tend to have stronger activations in
MLP layers.
And why might that be the case?
Keep in mind that shorter tokens tend to appear more often in training text.
So there's a little bit of a bias introduced there.
Okay.
And then we have something weird happening here.
This is at the very first, uh, transformer block.
And this is the transformer block that is as close as possible to the embeddings, which means as close
as possible to the raw text.
So as we move through the, uh, through the large language model, each transformer layer, we get
further and further away from the original text.
But here we are very close to the text.
This is just one stop after the embeddings, vectors and the position embeddings vectors get added together.
And here we see a pretty qualitative shift.
Most of these neurons, not all of them, but most of the neurons in this first MLP layer are actually
correlating positively with token length.
So longer tokens get more activation.
So that is for all of the line plots over here.
And then we get over here to the image again.
Every row in this image here in this matrix is one line from this plot over here.
And the color here corresponds to the height over here, which is the density or the estimate of the
pdf.
And so we see all of the same dynamics, but some features are just a little bit easier to visualize
in this image compared to all of these plots.
For example, something that you notice is that the later transformer layers here have a much tighter
distribution compared to the earlier layers with this one exception here.
I'm not sure why this one is so unusual here, that this row here corresponds to this purple line here.
So you do see that here that the yellow lines, the most yellow lines are a little bit more shifted
towards zero.
The distributions are a little bit more narrow.
So the correlations are basically closer to zero.
The interpretation of that is that by the time you get to the end of the large language model towards
the last couple of transformer blocks, the model is not really processing the current token anymore.
It's really transformed the current token into the a prediction for the next token.
So you will see this throughout lots of analyses over the next couple of sections that the later you
get into, the less the less the processing is related to the current token, the more it's related
to the predictions about the next token.
This is the final exercise.
Now there isn't really any new coding to do.
You just import the 1.3 billion parameter version of this model and then rerun the entire code file.
Be mindful that this will take several minutes just to load the model, and if you're running it on
the GPU, then that one forward pass is pretty quick.
If you're running this on the CPU, then that one forward pass will itself take several minutes.
Now there are two goals for this exercise.
First is to make sure that your code still works when you use it in a different model.
Now, keep in mind that different companies and different families of models can have different internal
naming conventions, so it's certainly not the case that any code you write should work for every single
possible variant of every LM.
But it is good to have code that works for at least different model sizes from the same type and the
same research group.
And of course, the main purpose of this exercise is to compare the findings qualitatively against the
smaller version of this model.
So therefore I recommend that before rerunning the code, you take screenshots of exercises one through
six, or at least the later exercises so that you can more easily compare with the larger model.
Okay, so enjoy working through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the results.
The only code I had to change was here in this code cell.
I just commented these two lines and uncommented these two lines, and then I ran the whole script again
from the start.
Okay, so then of course this is different here we can see there are now 24 blocks, 24 transformer
layers instead of 12.
And you can also see that the embeddings dimensionality is larger.
It's now 2048.
And that means that the MLP internal layers are different as well.
In fact, this is 8192 neurons in the MLP expansion layer.
And of course that number should be familiar to you.
That's the same as the number of tokens that we use.
And so that was another reason why I chose to have 8192 tokens, because now it's just going to add
a little bit of confusion, because when you're working with the analysis and working with the matrices
and indexing matrices, you really need to know.
You really need to be mindful of which dimension corresponds to tokens and which dimension corresponds
to neurons.
So that was part of the reason why I used exactly that number of tokens.
Okay.
Let's see.
The rest of the code is the same.
Uh, you will get some different results here.
So here with the sizes.
Yeah.
You'll get a different, uh, not there.
Here you will get different sizes of the activations here.
Of course, we have more, uh, keys printing out of this dictionary.
And now here is the first place where we already start seeing some differences.
Remember that these histograms look nearly identical for the smaller version of this model.
So the analysis is the same.
The tokens are identical.
It's exactly the same data that we are importing and pushing through the model.
And the model is you know, it's also the model from the same exact company, the same org.
Eleuther.
Uh, it's just that the model now has more parameters and more layers.
And now we really do see a qualitatively different distribution of activations.
So the long tokens have this kind of more Gaussian looking distribution.
And the shorter tokens and also the medium length tokens look a little bit different.
To me.
This looks like there's actually two distinct distributions in here.
One would be a very tight distribution peaking at around minus one half or something.
And then there's another distribution here.
That's something that you could model with like a mixture of Gaussians, but we're certainly not going
to get into that here.
But the main point is just qualitative that the large model and the small model do not necessarily show
the same patterns of results.
Even at this fairly large, you know, level of granularity.
Okay.
So the rest of this code is fine.
You can see again the number is different from what it was before because the neurons are different
of course.
But this number is the same as this number.
That is what we want to confirm.
Uh, let me see.
Now I'm just going to go down and.
Right.
So okay, now when you have this many, uh, line plots, you really don't want to have a legend.
That's why this was commented out in the beginning.
Okay, let's recreate that graph.
Okay.
So here we see that some features are the same as with the small version of the model.
And some features are a little bit different.
So we still do see this shift of the first layer.
The first transformer block.
Immediately after the token embeddings.
That one is shifted to the right.
And as I mentioned, you will see repeatedly that lots of the intermediate layers kind of smoothly transition
from one layer into the next layer in terms of their characteristics and relation to token categories
and so on.
But there tends to be something qualitatively distinct going on in the very first layer, and also in
the very last or last couple of layers.
Shortly before we get to the selection for the next token in the sequence.
And you also don't see exactly quite as clearly.
Maybe I'll change the upper scaling limit of the color here.
Yeah.
You do see this pattern a little bit that the later layers still get tighter, their distributions get
tighter because the processing is less about the current token, and it starts to become more abstracted
and more about selecting the next token in the sequence.
And so actually, yeah, I guess that is a little bit similar to in the smaller version of the model,
although this, uh, compression was a little bit tighter and more localized to the later layers.
Remember that the concept of token length does not exist inside the model directly.
That is, models do not process tokens according to how many characters they contain.
The model just processes the tokens as integers, as vectors of embeddings.
On the other hand, it is also the case that tokens with fewer characters tend to appear more often
in the training text.
So the relationship between activation and token length is probably due to token In frequency and not
length per se.
These kinds of third variable explanations can either be useful interpretations or confounds and flaws
in the research, so make sure that you are aware of these possibilities of alternative explanations.
Nonetheless, it's quite interesting to see that there are some striking qualitative differences across
the different layers, but not necessarily across all of the layers.
So that's a theme that you'll continue observing in mech Interp.
Sometimes you will find that the earliest layers and the latest layers are kind of off doing their own
thing, and lots of layers in the middle are strongly correlated with each other.
The last point that I'll make here is about the assumption of universality, which I introduced in the
videos earlier in the course where I discussed general concepts and criticisms of mechanistic interpretability.
Remember that in this context, universality means that the same principles observed in small models
are also present in large models.
Now, the analyses that you did here in this video were not a definitive case of supporting or disproving
that assumption.
But you can see that some of the macroscopic characteristics are not necessarily qualitatively the same
between small and large models.
Now, it certainly is possible that universality exists for some computational features of models,
but not for all features of models.